---
layout: post
title:  "Programming the Anyma uDMX Controller"
date:   2016-05-20 16:00:00 -0600
category: posts
---
© 2016 by Dave Hocker (AtHomeX10@gmail.com)

## Overview

The purpose of this post is to share what I have learned about programming the
Anyma uDMX interface using Python and PyUSB on the Raspberry Pi (RPi). The Anyma uDMX
interface is relatively inexpensive and there are a large number of clones available 
from sites like eBay. However, there seems to be a dearth of information available for
programming this interface under Linux (Raspbian Jessie in this case).

Many thanks go out to Markus Baertschi and the work he did on the uDMX-linux utility
(see https://github.com/markusb/uDMX-linux). His C++ based uDMX utility served as the basis
for the majority of my learning exercise. 

## Source Code

The full source generated by this research can be found at [GitHub](https://www.github.com/dhocker/uDMX-pyusb).
The real meat here is the udmx-pyusb package.

## Prerequisites

### PyUSB
I used PyUSB as the starting point for figuring out how to program the uDMX controller.
PyUSB is a [PyPi package](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/pyusb) that provides Python access to USB devices.
It requires one of the following: libusb 1.0, libusb 0.1 or OpenUSB. See [5](#5). libusb 1.0 is part of the 
Raspbian Jessie image available from [raspberrypi.org](https://www.raspberrypi.org/downloads/raspbian/)

### Operating Systems
The main purpose of this project was to learn about using the uDMX interface on a RPi. However, enough of the work
was done on OS X 10.11.3 to conclude that this code will work or can be made to work on both OSes. If you want to
try it on OS X, use brew to install libusb (it will install libusb 1.0).

## What I Learned
Here are some key things I learned about the uDMX under Raspbian Jessie.

### Finding the uDMX Interface

#### From the Command Line
As there is no Raspbian Jessie kernel driver for the uDMX, it does not show up under /dev like /dev/tty.

However, you can locate it this way:

    ~/rpi/uDMX-pyusb $ lsusb

    Bus 001 Device 005: ID 16c0:05dc Van Ooijen Technische Informatica shared ID for use with libusb
    Bus 001 Device 004: ID 1a40:0201 Terminus Technology Inc. FE 2.1 7-port Hub
    Bus 001 Device 003: ID 0424:ec00 Standard Microsystems Corp. SMSC9512/9514 Fast Ethernet Adapter
    Bus 001 Device 002: ID 0424:9514 Standard Microsystems Corp. 
    Bus 001 Device 001: ID 1d6b:0002 Linux Foundation 2.0 root hub


The uDMX is the first device at Bus 001, Device 005 with ID 16c0:05dc. The 16c0 is the vendor ID and
the 05dc is the product ID. The uDMX can be found at /dev/bus/usb/001/005.

#### Programmatically
You can use the pyUSB package to programmatically find the uDMX. Note that this code
will return the very first uDMX device it finds.

{% highlight python %}
import usb # This is pyUSB

# This is the vendor ID and product ID for the Anyma uDMX clone interface.
vid = 0x16c0
pid = 0x05dc

# Find the uDMX interface
dev = usb.core.find(idVendor=vid, idProduct=pid)
{% endhighlight %}

The returned Device object can be used to manipulate the uDMX. Check out
[tryusb.py](#tryusb.py) to see some of the things you can do with
the Device object.

### Sending DMX Channel Data
TBD

### Permissions or How to Avoid Sudo <a id="Permissions"></a>
If you want to program the uDMX on a Raspberry Pi without always running sudo, you
must do something with the default permissions of the uDMX device.

    ~/rpi/uDMX-pyusb $ ls -al /dev/bus/usb/001/005
    crw-rw-r-- 1 root root 189, 4 Feb 25 15:30 /dev/bus/usb/001/005

Notice the permissions are: 664. Only root and members of the 
root group have write permission. This is why sudo is required for the current user (usually pi).
You can fix this issue by changing the permissions on the uDMX to: 666.

    sudo chmod 666 /dev/bus/usb/001/005

Now the permissions look like this.

    ~/rpi/uDMX-pyusb $ ls -al /dev/bus/usb/001/005
    crw-rw-rw- 1 root root 189, 4 Feb 25 15:30 /dev/bus/usb/001/005

Unfortunately, this is only a temporary fix. On the next reboot the permissions will revert
back to their default 664. One way to permanently fix this problem is to write a 
udev rule that sets the permissions to 666 when the device is plugged in. Here's the
rule.

    SUBSYSTEM=="usb", ATTR{idVendor}=="16c0", ATTR{idProduct}=="05dc", MODE="0666"

You can deploy this solution by editing the [98-uDMX-usb.rules](https://github.com/dhocker/uDMX-pyusb/blob/master/98-uDMX.rules) 
file and uncommenting the line that contains this rule. Copy the edited file to /etc/udev/rules.d.

    sudo cp 98-uDMX-usb.rules /etc/udev/rules.d

To make sure the rule is used, pull the uDMX and replug it.

While this result is better, there is still an obvious down side. It gives all users read/write access to the uDMX. We
can limit read/write access to members of the pi group by changing the rule to:

    SUBSYSTEM=="usb", ATTR{idVendor}=="16c0", ATTR{idProduct}=="05dc", GROUP="pi"

This rule leaves the permissions set to 664 while changing the ownership to root:pi.
Overall, this is probably more desirable. The root user owns the device, members of the 
pi group (which includes the default Raspbian user pi) have read/write access and all other users have read-only access.

    ~/rpi/uDMX-pyusb $ ll /dev/bus/usb/001/005
    crw-rw-r-- 1 root pi 189, 4 Feb 26 10:05 /dev/bus/usb/001/005

You can deploy this rule by editing [98-uDMX-usb.rules](https://github.com/dhocker/uDMX-pyusb/blob/master/98-uDMX.rules) 
file and uncommenting the line that contains this rule.

For more on udev rules see [Writing udev rules](http://www.reactivated.net/writing_udev_rules.html).

### Reboot Issues
This is an observation. Occasionally, on a warm reboot, the uDMX interface is not found. 
This problem does not happen all the time, but it does happen.
You might have to replug the device to get Raspbian to find it. Why this happens is unclear.

### Multiple uDMX Issues
It is possible to run multiple uDMX devices on one system, but it can be problematic. Most uDMX interfaces
and clones do not have unique serial numbers. 
This makes identification of each unique interface difficult.

Given the [detailed USB information](#DetailedUSBInfo) shown below, the following is available to identify
a uDMX.

* Vendor ID
* Product ID
* Manufacturer
* Product
* Serial
* Bus number
* Device number

Based on limited research it appears that only the Bus and Device numbers uniquely identify a
given uDMX interace. The other values are likely to be the same for all uDMX interfaces based on the 
Anyma design and firmware. Unfortunately, the Bus and Device number cannot be used reliably because simply moving 
a uDMX to another USB port will change one or both of those values.

If you want to use multiple uDMX interfaces, you need to plug them in one at a time and use the lsusb command
to determine the Bus and Device number for each one. And, after that you can't move them around without 
repeating the "find 'em" exercise.

The pyudmx.uDMXDevice.open() method will accept a bus number and device address if you need to manage multiple
uDMX interfaces.

Unless otherwise indicated, the [programs discussed below](#Programs) will work with the first uDMX interface they find.

### Detailed USB Information<a id="DetailedUSBInfo"></a>
Here is a dump of information for a uDMX clone. Most of the information in the dump seems to refer to
the firmware manufacturer not the hardware manufacturer. The firmware is open source.

    ~/rpi/uDMX-pyusb $ lsusb -v
    
    Bus 001 Device 005: ID 16c0:05dc Van Ooijen Technische Informatica shared ID for use with libusb
    Device Descriptor:
      bLength                18
      bDescriptorType         1
      bcdUSB               1.01
      bDeviceClass          255 Vendor Specific Class
      bDeviceSubClass         0 
      bDeviceProtocol         0 
      bMaxPacketSize0         8
      idVendor           0x16c0 Van Ooijen Technische Informatica
      idProduct          0x05dc shared ID for use with libusb
      bcdDevice            1.02
      iManufacturer           1 www.anyma.ch
      iProduct                2 uDMX
      iSerial                 3 ilLUTZminator001
      bNumConfigurations      1
      Configuration Descriptor:
        bLength                 9
        bDescriptorType         2
        wTotalLength           18
        bNumInterfaces          1
        bConfigurationValue     1
        iConfiguration          0 
        bmAttributes         0x80
          (Bus Powered)
        MaxPower              500mA
        Interface Descriptor:
          bLength                 9
          bDescriptorType         4
          bInterfaceNumber        0
          bAlternateSetting       0
          bNumEndpoints           0
          bInterfaceClass         0 (Defined at Interface level)
          bInterfaceSubClass      0 
          bInterfaceProtocol      0 
          iInterface              0 
    Device Status:     0x0000
      (Bus Powered)

## Programs, Modules and Packages <a id="Programs"></a>
During the process of figuring out how to program the uDMX, I wrote a bit of code.
Ultimately, this code resulted in a module package that can be installed in a virtual
environment using Pip.

### tryusb.py Program <a id="tryusb.py"></a>
My first learning tool was [tryusb.py](https://github.com/dhocker/udmx-pyusb/blob/master/tryusb.py). 
It does the following:

* Locates the uDMX interface using PyUSB.
* Prints some USB related information about the interface.
* Using PyUSB, sends some basic commands to a Venue ThinPar64 demonstrating 
how to manipulate the light via DMX.

It also helped me resolve some issues with [permissions](#Permissions) on the RPi. To run this app:

    python tryusb.py

### uDMX.py Program
This program functions pretty much like the C++ based 
[uDMX utility from Markus Baertschi](https://github.com/markusb/uDMX-linux). 
To get help, try

    ./uDMX --help
    or
    python uDMX.py --help

For each invocation, this program does the following:

* Loads the uDMX.conf file from /etc/uDMX.conf.
* Activates the virtualenv defined in the conf file IF PyUSB is not found in the current environment.
* Loads the .uDMXrc file defined in the conf file.
* Locates the uDMX interface based on vendor ID and product ID.
* Sends the DMX message defined by the command line arguments.

uDMX.py uses the pyudmx.py module.

### pyudmx.py Module
The pyudmx.py module provides a simple, easy to use module for talking to the uDMX interface. Essentially,
it is a uDMX specific adapter on top of the pyusb module. If you want to write a uDMX oriented application
consider starting with pyudmx.py.

Simple usage example:

{% highlight python %}
# Find the first uDMX
dev = pyudmx.uDMXDevice()
# Open uDMX and change value of channel 1
dev.open()
dev.send_single_value(0, 255) # sends the value 255 to DMX channel 1
dev.close()
{% endhighlight %}

In this example, the open() method will default to opening the first uDMX interface 
with vendor ID 0x16c0 and product ID 0x05dc.

## Useful References
1. [uDMX - tiny bus powered USB-DMX interface - Anyma](http://www.anyma.ch/research/udmx/)
2. [illutzminator](http://www.illutzminator.de/udmx.html?&L=1)
3. <a id="3"></a>[Markus Baertschi uDMX Utility](https://github.com/markusb/uDMX-linux)
4. [Writing udev rules](http://www.reactivated.net/writing_udev_rules.html)
5. <a id="5"></a>[PyUSB](https://github.com/walac/pyusb)
