---
layout: post
title:  "Yes, I'll have some Pi!"
date:   2016-05-02 16:00:00 -0500
category: posts
---
Welcome to my GitHub web site. Here you will find
musings about the various GitHub housed projects that I've worked on.

- Notes about the GitHub repos under my account
- Posts about research topics and projects

My projects tend to involve hardware of some kind with software to make the hardware
do something useful. For example, you will find two projects that together form an X10 home control
system: [athomepowerlineserver](https://github.com/dhocker/athomepowerlineserver) 
and [ahps_web](https://github.com/dhocker/ahps_web). 

Continuing in that vein, I am currently working on a DMX based lighting project. This involves
a DMX lighting controller and software to drive the controller with lighting scripts.
The driving force for this project is the desire to have a year-end holiday
light show in my front yard.

I particularly enjoy working with the Raspberry Pi (RPi). As a result a number of my projects
are deployed on RPi's (e.g. the X10 system and the DMX controller).

These days, my development language of choice is Python. This mostly comes from the RPi influence. However,
I have worked with a fair number of languages during my professional career. So, languages 
like C/C++, C# and Ruby (to name a few) are not out of the question.

I do most of my development on OS X and Raspbian Jessie. I occassionally use Ubuntu (just
upgraded to 16.04) and Windows 10. I spent most of my professional career on Windows
(and DOS before that and VM/370 and MVS before that).

Finally, this web site was constructed using Jekyll. It was a project all by itself and is
probably worth a post or two.
